So, we are now ready to look at another algorithm
called Quick sort. So, quick sort was invented
by a computer scientist called Tony Hoare
in the early 1960’s; that is about 50 years
ago. And Tony Hoare is a very well-known computer
scientist and he has in fact won The Turing
Award which is one of the highest achievements
awarded for academic computer scientist.
So, what is the purpose of quick sort? Well,
the purpose of quick sort is to overcome some
of the shortcomings that we saw in the merge
sort. So, one of the things that we saw in
the merge sort is that because of the merge
operation, we need extra storage and so, this
makes merge sort a little expensive.
So, we also observed that the reason that
we need this extra storage is because we have
in the merge operation that we might be pulling
out elements from both sides, when we are
populating the merged array. So, basically
some elements on the right might be smaller
than some elements on the left and this is
what results in merging. So, can we divide
everything. So, that this does not happen,
everything on the left is smaller and everything
on the right is larger, is it possible to
do a divide and conquer in this fashion?
Well, if this is the case, then what we need
to do is, we need to put the middle value
in the center. So, supposing we can find the
median. So, remember what the median is, the
median is the value such that exactly half
the values in the array are bigger and half
are smaller. So, now we move everything which
is smaller than m to the left half. So, we
have a set of values here which are less than
or equal to m and then we have on the right
side something which is strictly greater than
m.
So, of course, we have to do this shifting,
but the claim is that we can do this shifting
in linear time and we will see a way to do
this. So, assuming we can do this, pick a
value m which is the median and shift everything
smaller than m to the left, then this is roughly
going to be the half point, because m is a
value which splits the array into two parts,
those which are smaller are half and those
bigger are half.
Now, I do this recursive thing, I sort this
and I sort this and now remember there is
no need to merge, because everything on the
left is already smaller than everything on
the right. So, I can just go ahead and assume
the array is sorted. So, if I do this, then
by the analysis as for merge sort, I have
a recurrence which is t of n is 2 times t
n by 2 plus n and we know this is order n
log n.
So, this will give us the same complexity
as merge sort, but it will avoid some of the
overheads involved with creating extra space.
Because, when I do the recursive call here,
I can easily sort this part in place and this
part in place, because I do not need to refer
to the other part at all when I do this solution.
So, of course, there must be a catch and the
catch is how do we find the median? Right
at the beginning of our discussion, we said
that one of the reasons that we want to sort
is to do statistical things like find the
median. So, if we have sorted the array, then
the median value is the middle value, but
of course, our goal now is to sort the array.
So, we cannot assume that we have the median,
because we have already seen that sorting
is an easy way to find the median. So, it
is a kind of the chicken and egg problem,
we cannot use the median to sort.
So, what quick sort Tony Hoare algorithms
says, do not necessarily pick the medium,
just picks some value in A and do what we
said. So, you pick up this pivot and then
you break it up into two parts, those which
are smaller than the pivot and those that
are bigger than the pivot. So, the pivot is
just some value in the array, it need not
be the median and we will see that if that
is not the median, then this results in some
problem in terms of the worst case complexity,
but let us just ignore it.
So, we just pick some value in the array and
we take all those values smaller than that,
move it to the left, all those which are bigger
than that move it to the right. And then,
we sort them recursively and then we are guaranteed
that nothing on the left needs to be combined
with anything on the right after this. So,
the resulting array is sorted.
So, this is quick sort, choose a pivot element.
So, for example, you might just pick up the
very first value in the array as the pivot
elemet. Partition this array into the lower
and upper part. So, the lower part is those
which are less than the pivot, the upper part
is that which is greater than the pivot. So,
the crucial step is this partitioning, we
will see how to do this partitioning, that
is what we will see now. Then, we move this
pivot here. So, that it is in the correct
place and now we recursively sort this part
and this part and we are done, because nothing
needs to move.
So, here is a kind of high level description
of the algorithm through an example. So, supposing
this is my array, then I pick the first element
as the pivot namely 43. So, with respect to
43, I now partition this array. So, that everything
smaller than 43. So, what are the elements
smaller than 43 here, we have 32, 22 and 13.
So, these elements should come to the left
and the elements which are bigger namely 78,
63, 57, 91 should go to the right.
So, I do this partitioning and how do I do
this partitioning, well I kind of… So, I
brought everything to the left and then after
this, I recursively sort the left. So, this
is no longer assumed to be sorted it just
has everything smaller than 43, this is not
sorted, there are everything bigger than.
Then, recursively if I assume I can sort it,
then I have sorted the entire array, because
now nothing in the yellow side needs to be
combined with green side, the red pivot value
separates these two.
So, the first thing that we need to understand
is how to do this partition. So, there are
two ways to partition. So, we will look at
one in detail and show some code for it and
then we will look at another through an example
and you will have to write the code by yourself,
if you are interested. So, here is one way
to partition. So, I start with the pivot element
at the left and now I have this entire range
of values to the right which are unsorted.
So, I will put two indices which I will indicate
in this picture with two color pointers, a
yellow pointer and a green pointer, their
significance will become a little clearer
once we move a couple of steps in the algorithm.
So, what we do is that everything to the right
of the green pointer. So, the green pointer
indicates the end of the part which has already
been partitioned. So, anything to the right
of the green pointer is unpartitioned and
the yellow pointer on the other hand is going
to indicate. So, this is going to indicate
the limit of the lower part.
So, I need. So, basically in general I am
going to have this picture. So, I am going
to have the pivot here, then I am going to
have the lower part here which I have already
found. Then, I am going to have the upper
part here, these are the elements I have already
scanned and partitioned and then I have the
part that is to do. So, in the beginning everything
is to do and there is no lower part and there
is no upper part.
So, what I am saying that we will keep these
pointers like this. So, this thing will point
to the end of this and this thing will point
to the end of this. So, this is what we want
to achieve. So, we start as I said with this
picture. So, what we do is, if we see something
which is lower, then I extend the lower part
and I am move to the next element, again we
see something that is lower. So, we extend
the lower part. So, if this point would be
saying is that the lower part has two values
32 and 22 and the upper part is empty and
everything from 78 onwards is not sorted.
Now, I look at 78. So, 78 is bigger than 43.
So, the lower part stays here and now I have
a non empty upper part namely 78. Now, I look
at 63, once again 63 belongs to the upper
part. So, again I move this forward, 57 again
belongs to the upper part. So, I move it forward,
91 again I move it forward. So, the first
interesting thing happens when I come to 13.
So, now, when I come to 13, I find that it
must going to the lower part, but the lower
part is far away.
So, how do I achieve this. So, what I will
do is, I know that this element to the right
of the lower pointer. So, this is bigger than
P and this element is smaller than P. So,
one way to achieve what I need is to exchange
these two values. So, I exchange 13 and 78.
So, I take 13, I label it as lower, then I
exchange and move both points. So, this is
a forward partitioning algorithm which keeps
reducing the length of the un partition part,
if I see something which is upper, I just
move the green pointer. If I see something
that is lower, I exchange that lower element
with the first part of the upper thing and
then I extend both partitions.
Then, finally, at this point I still do not
have the final thing, but I want this pivot
element to be in between these two. So, now
the point is that I know that this is the
last. So, what is to the right of the yellow
pointer is the first upper limit and what
is to the left of the yellow pointer is the
last lower thing. So, I can exchange the 43
and 13 and then I get the final array partitioned
as I want with the pivot in the middle, the
lower part on the left and upper part on the
right.
So, this is how we do quick sort in general.
So, in general now remember that after we
do this partitioning, we are going to have
to quick sort this part and quick sort this
part. So, the recursive calls will be sorting
different segments. So, it is useful to say
for each call that I am sorting from some
left limit to some right limit. So, in general
quick sort will take the array and it will
take two pointers, it will say sort from l
to r minus 1.
Now, if this length is small, in other words,
if I have only one value, if r minus l is
less than or equal to 1, if either I have
only one value or if I have no values to sort,
then I do nothing. So, this is the base case.
So, this is a recursive value algorithm, if
the sorting, array to be sorted has only one
element we do nothing. Otherwise, using the
terminology of the previous example, we use
the yellow to indicate the position of the
yellow pointer and we use green to indicate
the position of the green pointer. So, these
two variables indicate the position of these
two arrows.
So, remember that we start to the right of
the pivot. So, initially we have at the position
l, we have the pivot and r minus 1 is the
last index. So, this is our pivot P. So, our
initial thing is to say that put both these
pointers here. So, initially yellow is l plus
1. So, that is this position and we start
now moving the green. So, green starts at
l plus 1 and goes until r minus 1. So, if
we see that the green value is smaller than
the pivot. So, this is the pivot. So, A of
l is the pivot.
So, if the green value, the value I am looking
at under the green pointer is smaller, then
I do this exchange. So, if I am here somewhere
and I have this green value, then what happens
is if this is smaller, then I exchange these
two values. So, that is what this is saying,
swap A the element at position yellow and
the element at position green and A should
be swapped and then, I will also increment
the yellow pointer. The green point is being
incremented anyway at every step.
So, finally, after this loop I have done this
partitioning to the extent where I have the
pivot element, I have the lower part and the
upper part. And now what I want to do is,
I want to move the pivot to the center, at
this point I have the yellow pointer here
and the green pointer here. So, I need to
take the last element here and exchange it
with the pivot and that is what this is doing.
It is saying exchange the value at position
l with the value at position yellow minus
1, now having done this, now I want to recursively
sort. So, I want to sort from the beginning
l up to the left of this yellow pointer. So,
I sort from l to yellow, then I want to sort
everything on the right. So, I start with
yellow plus 1 and sort until r. So, these
are the two recursive calls. But, now the
important thing is that at this point everything
between l and yellow is smaller than the pivot,
everything beyond yellow plus 1 up to r is
bigger than the pivot. So, after these two
sorting sub recursive calls to quick sort
nothing more needs to be done, we are done.
So, as I said this partitioning strategy can
also be implemented in a different way and
in fact, this is the original partitioning
strategy proposed by Tony Hoare. So, in his
original strategy, the idea was to not start
from one end and sweep until you claim all
the elements, but you start at opposite ends.
So, you start building up in some sense, the
you start building up the lower side from
here and you start building up the upper side
from here.
And gradually the lower side grows, until
it can expend no more, the upper side goes
and then everything is in place and then,
you do the final swap as before. So, here
what you do is, you start with again I will
use the same color thing. So, yellow refers
to lower green refers to upper. So, what I
will do is, I will take the yellow pointer
and keep scanning until I find the value which
is not yellow. So, 32 is smaller than 43.
So, remember that we have trying to grow the
yellow partition is the lower partition.
So, we are trying to include in the lower
partition everything smaller than 43 and we
are trying to include in the upper partition
everything bigger than 43. So, I keep moving
the yellow thing until I find the first error
in some sense. So, 32 is smaller than 43.
So, I skip over it, 22 is also smaller than
43. So, I skip over it and now I reach a value
72. So, at this point my partition ends here
and 72 cannot be included, because it is bigger
than 43.
Now, I start on right hand side and I look
for the position, where I can include things
in the upper thing, but the very first thing
I see 13 should not be there. So, at this
point upper limit is here. So, now, what I
do is, I exchange these two values, if I exchange
these two values, then this will become 13,
this will become 78 and then, I will be able
to shift these two boundaries by 1. So, this
is the basic step in this partitioning strategy.
So, at the next step what I do is, I exchange
the 13 and 78 and no I say that I have the
lower thing up to here and I have an upper
thing up to here. So, this is the invariant
now, we have the lower thing on the left part
and upper thing on the right part and in between
we have the unsorted elements, but we have
these two indicators, the left most unsorted…
the left most unpartitioned element, the right
most unpartitioned element.
So, now, I again a start doing the same thing,
I move the yellow right, until I can no longer
extend lower, here I cannot extend it anyway,
because 63 should already not be there. So,
I cannot move this partition. On the other
hand, the upper partition can move, because
91 is bigger. So, I will move it left, 57
is still bigger. So, I will move it left again,
63 is still bigger. So, I will move it left
again.
And now I find that the right partition indicator
has moved to the left of the left partition.
So, when this exchange happens, then we terminate
this partition. So, when the right boundary
crosses the left boundary, then we have finished
partitioning of the elements, because there
is nothing in between the two elements to
be partitioning any more. So, once we have
terminated, now we have the same problem as
before which is that we want to move this
element to the center, but now remember that
at this point, when this thing terminates,
the right marker is pointing to the end point
of the lower limit.
So, I can just exchange these two. So, I can
exchange the 13 and 43. So, I take this there
to move this here and then, I get my answer.
So, if I move this and then, I simultaneously
move the green pointer, now I have a pointer
to the last of the lower elements, I have
a pointer to the first of the upper elements
and now I can apply quick sort recursively
to this part and to this part.
So, we will not write Pseudo code or describe
this algorithm in more detail, but you can
definitely try and work out similar way of
keeping these indices moving as we did for
the earlier partitioning and see if you can
get it right, this is also discussed in many
of the books. So, both these partition algorithms
appear in text books and you can choose which
ever you find easier.
In both cases remember that there is a basic
invariant condition, there are these two markers
and these two markers indicate the part which
has already when partition, the limits of
the lower and the upper part. And then, there
is an unpartitioned part and when the unpartitioned
part becomes empty you are done.